I think that there's a consensus that
when we're working with people who have
severe or acute symptoms that we sustain
our motivational interviewing
communication practice that we want to
remain in touch with that individual
with their thoughts their feelings and
convey that you know that we're in touch
with them and connected to them as best
as possible it seems to me that that
would not be a good time to disconnect
and say well this person is no longer
you know speaking in reality and you
know and reflective listening is so
versatile that it can handle statements
and information from people and many
versatile ways let me give you an
example say we have a person who's
delusional and he says something like my
children and my wife are upstairs at the
day center you know they're talking to
the other people and this person does
not have a wife or children so we could
get into picking apart that statement of
value waiting at or we can reflect its
essence so now say that first is out of
touch with reality at the time but I
might say it seems that you've been
thinking about your family a lot lately
which can be a validating response that
does not pick apart and that may keep
that person talking to me and in
addition to reflecting what people
actually say if we're speaking and
trying to remain connected to someone
who has acute or severe symptoms they
may also be feeling very things they may
be saying things we can tell they're
very frustrated or so we could connect
to their feelings and you know I I'm
understanding that you're very
frustrated right now you know this is
really frustrating even though the
content the verbal content may not have
anything to do with you know being
frustrated or what the person is talking
about
so that and that's the same way we would
remain engage with a person who doesn't
have severe symptoms we're listening to
what they're thinking saying we're
picking up what they're feeling
we're picking up mean
behind what they say these are referred
to as complex reflections versus simple
ones so in reflective listening just the
way we would reflect to a person who
doesn't have severe mental illness we
reflect the meaning behind what people
are saying
feeling etc and that would that would be
the distinction between a simple and a
complex reflection and in motivational
interviewing a proficient practitioner
does more complex reflections than
simple ones so here's where that would
be very useful if someone is not
speaking in reality terms etc but let's
look at a person who is in reality and
person who says something like you know
everybody's trying to get me to stop
drinking they're always down my back I
know what I have to do about it now say
I reflect back you know what you have to
do about your drinking but you're not
doing it because other people are
nagging you about it
the person did not say that but I've
picked up another meaning that would
make that a complex reflection so when
you're picking up meaning that that
clients are and the meaning can be in
when you get really therapeutic can be
something that the client really has no
idea of what as I begin to talk to you
they could be talking about areas that
are really not strongly in their
consciousness you know but we are
beginning to pick that meaning up and
they could actually you know surprise
people with some of their thinking and
reflective listening so the reflective
process whether or not the person is
grounded in reality or not we can pick
up perhaps some meaning behind what
they're saying even in a delusional
statements or we'll certainly begin to
consider what that might mean to the
person like the example of you're
thinking about your family which is a
simple basic validation of I heard you
you know we may not be communicating
precisely but I heard that from you
but also the feeling and picking up the
feelings so that the difference between
a complex reflection is that one is
either adding more meaning to it adding
to it versus a simple reflection where I
would simply reflect what the person
said without any changes so I might say
to that delusional person so your wife
and family are upstairs in the day
center and I haven't changed it to have
an end or I might say to somebody who
comes in ranting and raving I don't want
to be here they forced me to come to
your clinic and I'm not even sick and I
might just repeat back what they said
you don't want to be here somebody
forced you to come to this clinic and
you don't think you're sick that would
be a simple reflection versus a more
complex one which may be so it seems
that other people think that you're
having mental health problems and that
you need some kind of help for it but
you don't agree with them I've added
more than what the client gave me okay
so those are the two distinction I think
that when people have acute symptoms
that one could add meaning to what
they're saying pick up on their feelings
and and reflect that back and try to
remain engaged with them as much as
possible and not let that relationship
become disconnected considering that it
was connected in the first place because
if the if the client had previously been
attending treatment where one is really
not connecting to their real thoughts
feelings their disappointments before we
have a learned motivational interviewing
for whatever reason when I did therapy
with severely mentally ill people I got
to know who they were I don't know how I
did it
but I got to know them what they hurt
they were living with this illness how
disappointed they were and that things
didn't go the way they thought they
would in their lives etc there seems to
be some kind of a consensus that talking
therapy is really not needed for
severely mentally ill people and I
completely disagree with that and I
think that they need it as much as
anyone else that when we're working with
severe symptoms and severe illness we
need to connect with the person behind
the symptoms who is this person how are
they experiencing their life this way
and I think motivational interviewing
and
secular reflection a reflective
listening can create and foster that
connection and sustain it and keep it
going